GIP-0081: Indexing Payments (#59)
graphprotocol/graph-improvement-proposals: gips/0081-indexing-payments.md

> ---

Reviewer: As per https://github.com/graphprotocol/graph-improvement-proposals/pull/30#issuecomment-2270979948, I would suggest renaming to "0081.md".

Author: Holding off until all comments are resolved so as to not confuse Github

> GIP: 0081

Reviewer: I believe needed in YAML parsing to avoid being treated as 81 and leading zeros dropped.
```suggestion
GIP: 0081
```
```suggestion
GIP: "0081"
```

Title: A New Proposal for Indexing Payments

> Authors: Matias <matias@edgeandnode.com>, Pablo <pablo@edgeandnode.com>

Reviewer: For unambiguous simple front-matter parsing I suggest quoting at least when a list if supplied, although perhaps less important for a single member.
```suggestion
Authors: "Matias <matias@edgeandnode.com>", "Pablo <pablo@edgeandnode.com>"
```

> Created: 2024-10-21

Reviewer: Just to put it in as a TODO for you, with whatever date it turns out to be. :)
```suggestion
Created: 2024-12-12
```

Updated: 2024-10-21
Stage: Draft
Discussions-To: <TODO>

> Category: Protocol Logic

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Category: "Protocol Logic"
```

> Depends-On: GIP-0066, GIP-0068

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Depends-On: "GIP-0066", "GIP-0068"
```

Replaces: GIP-0058
---

## Abstract

> This GIP describes **Indexing Payments**, a mechanism by which a protocol participant (commonly a gateway) can incentivize a candidate indexer to service a subgraph. It details a target, trust-minimized end-state that relies on Graph Horizon, while also introducing a semi-trusted Minimum Viable Product (MVP) based on the current protocol and off-chain components (gateway + indexer stacks). This GIP is an alternative, simplified proposal to [GIP-0058](https://github.com/graphprotocol/graph-improvement-proposals/blob/main/gips/0058-Replacing-Bonding-Curves-with-Indexing-Fees.md).

Author: done

## Motivation

> Curation has generally been perceived as a source of friction for Developers that may only want to have subgraphs indexed to power their decentralized applications. It requires locking up certain amounts of GRT, and the necessary amounts might vary depending on curation on other subgraphs. While the quality of service provided on the network is generally high, Indexers collect rewards for posting Proofs of Indexing independently to the query service they provide, so Developers are not guaranteed a certain level of service for the amount of curation they put into the system.

Reviewer: I am not sure what the first sentance means. Are you trying to say that Curation does not provide a convenient way for Developers to have the subgraphs they need indexed? (Perhaps say that more directly?)

From second second sentance I would remove "up certain amounts of", for "the necessary amounts might vary ..." you might want to consider simply saying the amount required is not always clear and is influenced by other activity on the network?

Author: re-worded

For Indexers, there is no clear relationship between the Indexing Rewards on a subgraph and the amount of work required to index it. Attempts at defining better curation and rewards models to pay for indexing have so far been unsuccessful, which presents a need for a simpler mechanism where parties interested in indexing a subgraph can simply pay for it through the protocol. However, when building such a mechanism, it is imperative to preserve the protocol's trust-minimization and decentralization principles.

## Prior Art

> GIP-0058 presents a previous version of a very similar proposal. This GIP re-introduces the same concepts, but incorporates the latest approach in Graph Horizon, and simplifies the proposal with an off-chain MVP while clarifying that the actor engaging in **Indexing Payments** is generally a Gateway running automated indexer selection.

Reviewer: I suggest linking to GIP-0058, like [GIP-0058](0058-Replacing-Bonding-Curves-with-Indexing-Fees.md), at least for first reference. (That will not work within current PR which does not have the GIP, but should when merged, and if you include an updated version in this PR.)

> [GIP-0058](https://github.com/graphprotocol/graph-improvement-proposals/blob/main/gips/0058-Replacing-Bonding-Curves-with-Indexing-Fees.md) presents a previous version of a very similar proposal. This GIP re-introduces the same concepts, but incorporates the latest approach in Graph Horizon, and simplifies the proposal with an off-chain MVP while clarifying that the actor engaging in **Indexing Payments** is generally a Gateway running automated indexer selection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[GIP-0058](https://github.com/graphprotocol/graph-improvement-proposals/blob/main/gips/0058-Replacing-Bonding-Curves-with-Indexing-Fees.md) presented a similar proposal. This GIP re-introduces the same concepts, but incorporates the latest approach in Graph Horizon, and simplifies the proposal with an off-chain MVP while clarifying that the actor engaging in **Indexing Payments** is generally a Gateway running automated indexer selection.
```

## High-Level Description

We are proposing a new coordination mechanism to incentivize subgraph serving to a performant level. Such a coordination mechanism is necessary to jump-start, and sometimes maintain, performant subgraph serving. One such time is when a subgraph is being upgraded. In early conversations this has been referred to as **Direct Indexing Payments** (DIPs).

In particular, the coordination mechanism has been designed with the following in mind:

- The objective is to get subgraphs served through the protocol to a sufficiently performant level

> - The price to get a subgraph served at said level should ideally be related to the amount of work required.

Reviewer: I'll second, although I picked up earlier too. It would be fine if you have a broader goal that includes quality of service that this mechanism explicitly defines as a goal (clarifying what serving to a performant lever means) and addresses. It might be you talk about this later and I should come back and update this comment.

> - The price to get a subgraph served at said level should ideally be related to the amount of work required.

Reviewer: Reading onwards I see that quality of service is a factor. This is valid and great to make part of the narrative IMO.

I would consider making the first point about being able to select indexers that best meet consumer needs, in terms of price and quality of service. You might consider then adding a separate point on incentivising indexers to provide good quality of service (due to them being able to attract more work). That might more directly link to what the proposal suggests.

> - The price to get a subgraph served at said level should ideally be related to the amount of work required.

Reviewer 2: Sufficiently performant level could be reworded as sufficient level of performance

> - The price to get a subgraph served at said level should ideally be related to the amount of work required.

Author: Ok, I've re-worded the GIP to address this issue. Let me know what you think.

tldr; I've removed mentions of "level of performance" and "quality of service" in favor of "subgraph serving" (which is defined at the beginning) and "subgraph serving characteristics" (for which I've given examples but haven't defined)

- The gateway defines the desired characteristics of the subgraph serving to meet its consumers needs. E.g. latency, uptime, freshness, etc.

> - The gateway assesses historic serving characteristics by indexers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The gateway assesses historic serving characteristics of indexers.
```

> While the proposal is meant to fully support this use case, it does not exclude other use cases that may organically arise. Several components are general and can be re-used.

Reviewer: 'general' -> 'generic'

Reviewer 2: organically arise could be arise organically

Author: done

> Looking further into the above, we assert that as described, it has some concerns that we need to address:

Reviewer: I would explicitly state 'This proposal seeks to address the following concerns raised for GIP-0058:' Key aspect I am responding for is don't make the reader have to work to figure out what 'the above is' and directly state 'GIP-0058', actual wording can be different and what I suggest might not be qute what you intend.

1. Desired performance should be defined by the payer.

> 1. Performance can only be assessed after the service has been consumed.

Reviewer: Do you edit using VS Code? If so, I suggest an extension like 'Markdown All in One', and also 'markdownlint' if not using it already. (Other editors might have equivalents.)

When you do, numbered lists will automatically be renumbered. Repeated 1.s do render fine, just a little nicer to have numbers in raw format, and not having them is an indicator you could probably benefit from configuring your environment for markdown editing.

Author: Thanks, this has been really helpful. Solved!

1. The cost of serving a subgraph is unknown a-priori, and it depends on the desired query performance as well as the indexing cost.

To solve for the first two, we propose that the gateway is the one coordinating with the indexers. Gateways can define and assess Quality of Service (QoS) on an ongoing basis and decide which indexers to continue to work with based on that.

> To solve for the last concern, we propose that indexers are paid proportionally to the amount of work they do to index the subgraph. This amount of work is reported by indexers and thus needs to be sufficiently verifiable for gateways, fishermen or other indexers to dispute how much work was actually done.

Author: not doing this for now...

> In particular we propose that the coordination mechanism is underpinned by an **Indexing Agreement** to be drafted by the gateway, shared with a subset of indexers of its choosing and subsequently approved by some of those indexers. These agreements are designed to allow for indexers to work and collect for their work without having to go back to the payer. They are self-contained in that regard. Furthermore, they specify the following:

Reviewer: I think here 'without having to go back to the payer' might be stated as 'without needing to trust the payer', or alternative with a trust-minimised dependency for payment?

Author: done

> 2. The data service that will initiate payment collection

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. The data service that will initiate payment collection.
```

> 3. A deadline by which the agreement must be accepted

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. A deadline by which the agreement must be accepted.
```

> 4. An end date to the agreement

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. An end date to the agreement.
```

1. a deadline by which the agreement must be accepted
1. an end date to the agreement
1. a maximum amount payable for the initial indexing.
1. a maximum amount payable for the ongoing indexing. The ongoing indexing is the indexing that happens between the last collection and the present.
1. the maximum amount of time that can elapse between collections.
1. a price per unit of work done.

> This agreement is to be upheld by protocol smart contracts, leveraging horizon primitives. This means that payers will have to escrow funds similarly to what's done for query fees. Between the smart contracts and the escrow, indexers are guaranteed that if they accept an indexing agreement, they'll be compensated as agreed, without the need to trust the agreement's counterpart.

Reviewer 2: Also, capitialisation on each bullet point

> This agreement is to be upheld by protocol smart contracts, leveraging horizon primitives. This means that payers will have to escrow funds similarly to what's done for query fees. Between the smart contracts and the escrow, indexers are guaranteed that if they accept an indexing agreement, they'll be compensated as agreed, without the need to trust the agreement's counterpart.

Author: > Also, capitialisation on each bullet point

Done

> This agreement is to be upheld by protocol smart contracts, leveraging horizon primitives. This means that payers will have to escrow funds similarly to what's done for query fees. Between the smart contracts and the escrow, indexers are guaranteed that if they accept an indexing agreement, they'll be compensated as agreed, without the need to trust the agreement's counterpart.

Author: done

At the same time, agreements are cancellable by either party at any time, with some limitations put in place to allow indexers to collect for all work done up to that point.

Putting all of this together the solution consists of the following:

- Indexers disclose publicly their price per unit of work.

> - Gateways send indexing agreements to indexers they want to work with.

Reviewer: Could/should we make this 'that best serve the needs of their consumers' rather than 'they want to work with'?

Reviewer 2: disclose publically could be publically disclose

> - Indexers accept (on-chain) agreements that meet their criteria and get to work indexing.

Reviewer: Suggest 'get to work' -> 'start'.

Author: done

- On a regular basis:

>   - Indexers collect for their work, by posting on-chain the original agreement, a Proof of Indexing (PoI) and the amount of work done for that period.

Reviewer: Indexers collect *payment* for their work? (Add payment?)

>   - Indexers collect for their work, by posting on-chain the original agreement, a Proof of Indexing (PoI) and the amount of work done for that period.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Indexers collect payment for their work, by posting on-chain the original agreement, a Proof of Indexing (PoI) and the amount of work done for that period.
```

>   - Gateways monitor the QoS per open agreement and assess if they need to cancel (on-chain) and/or replace any of them.

Reviewer: I think if 'assess if it meets their requirements and the agreement should be continued, or cancelled if not'? Some duplication between cancel and/or replace to be resolved here.

Author: done

This solution aims to:

> - compensate indexers for the exact amount of work they do.

Reviewer: This is not solved in a trust-minised way, so I suggest saying 'exact amount of work' is misplaced. I think enough to say 'based on the amount of work to perform indexing'.

Author: done

> - compensate indexers for the exact amount of work they do.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- compensate indexers based on the amount of work they perform.
```

- allow indexers to gracefully exit the agreement if it can't be fully fulfilled.
- cap the amount payers will spend on indexing. Though they might spend but get no service back if the cap is too low.
- incentivize sufficient QoS by awarding agreements to indexers that provide it.
- provide sufficient transparency and flexibility for gateways, so that they can abstract the complexity and provide simpler pricing to subgraph developers

### Indexing Indexer Selection Algorithm (IISA)

> As mentioned above, gateways get to choose who they work with. In Horizon, gateways can be run be any protocol participant and they get to decide how to implement the indexer selection. Nevertheless we propose that a good IISA needs to considers QoS, available stake (with delegation), and other parameters to find the optimal balance between QoS, load-balancing, economic security and price.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As mentioned above, gateways get to choose who they work with. In Horizon, gateways can be run be any protocol participant and they get to decide how to implement their indexer selection. Nevertheless we propose that a good IISA needs to considers QoS, available stake (with delegation), and other parameters to find the optimal balance between QoS, load-balancing, economic security and price.
```

Author: done

### Arbitration and disputes

> Since collections are tied to "amount of work done" and this is reported by the indexers themselves, there needs to be a mechanism to punish malicious reporting. We propose here to use slashing. For this to be fair we need the "amount of work done" to be verifiable by an arbitrator in the case of a dispute.

Reviewer: I am not sure it is going to be verifiable. Maybe you want to leave that can of worms closed... I would keep the emphasis on this low. For example downgrade 'we need' to 'should be'.

### Amount of work done

As an initial iteration of the "amount of work done" proxy we propose to use indexed blocks and subgraph entities. In particular the amount to be collected by indexers shall be equal to:

> - A price per amount of blocks indexed (with a different price for each chain). These are charged incrementally, i.e. every time a PoI is posted, the indexer collects a payment for the new blocks indexed since the last PoI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A price per blocks indexed (with a different price for each chain). These are charged incrementally, i.e. every time a PoI is posted, the indexer collects a payment for the new blocks indexed since the last PoI.
```

> - A price per amount of entities stored by the subgraph (same price for each chain). These are charged on a recurring basis per unit of time, for the total number of entities on the subgraph at the time the PoI is posted times the time since the last PoI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A price per extracted entity of the subgraph (same price for each chain). These are charged on a recurring basis per unit of time, for the total number of entities on the subgraph at the time the PoI is posted times the time since the last PoI.
```

> We understand that this approach is vulnerable to some forms of abuse. For example, malicious users can deploy subgraphs that are expensive to index but amount to a comparatively small "amount of work done" proxy fee. We suggest that indexers stop serving such subgraphs as soon as possible, to minimize the damage done.

Reviewer: I would be tempted to add something about us seeking better pricing to address this in the future.

> We understand that this approach is vulnerable to some forms of abuse. For example, malicious users can deploy subgraphs that are expensive to index but amount to a comparatively small "amount of work done" proxy fee. We suggest that indexers stop serving such subgraphs as soon as possible, to minimize the damage done.

Reviewer 2: The font used by github makes it almost impossible to discern between a I and a l. Does PoI have to be PoI and not POI?

> We understand that this approach is vulnerable to some forms of abuse. For example, malicious users can deploy subgraphs that are expensive to index but amount to a comparatively small "amount of work done" proxy fee. We suggest that indexers stop serving such subgraphs as soon as possible, to minimize the damage done.

Author: > The font used by github makes it almost impossible to discern between a I and a l. Does PoI have to be PoI and not POI?

I actually prefer POI, but picked up PoI from `0009-arbitration-charter.md`, though, to be fair, POI is wide used in various other GIPs, so will switch it up shortly.

> We understand that this approach is vulnerable to some forms of abuse. For example, malicious users can deploy subgraphs that are expensive to index but amount to a comparatively small "amount of work done" proxy fee. We suggest that indexers stop serving such subgraphs as soon as possible, to minimize the damage done.

Reviewer: Not something I impose on you as author, but as an input for you to consider. I prefer capitalisation to match that of what you are abbreviating. As it is written as 'Proof of Indexing', I would do PoI.

My default assumption is alternatives are due to laziness or not having thought about it, rather than design.

> We understand that this approach is vulnerable to some forms of abuse. For example, malicious users can deploy subgraphs that are expensive to index but amount to a comparatively small "amount of work done" proxy fee. We suggest that indexers stop serving such subgraphs as soon as possible, to minimize the damage done.

Reviewer 3: > I hope developers don't default to putting all their subgraph into a single big entity 😆

This is definitely a risk in the MVP, but worth noting that if they do and it becomes too onerous for Indexers, then they will probably drop the agreements and refuse to serve those subgraphs...
(or if everyone does it, then indexers will raise their prices accordingly).

(We still need to iterate on pricing, but the above is why I think the MVP pricing will work, at least for now)

We anticipate needing to perform research into alternative approaches in the near future. We theorize that "amount of work done" may be modeled as a **subgraph gas** unit down the line, similar to ethereum gas.

### Minimum Viable Product

While this proposal defines a smart contracts based solution using Graph Horizon, we also propose an MVP that can be built without any smart contracts changes using off-chain interfaces between Indexers and Gateways. This will allow us to implement parts of the solution that will be useful for the full proposal implementation, will also allow us to learn from seeing the mechanism in operation, and will help define the user interfaces and pricing approaches for subgraph developers that can be built on top of the protocol. As the MVP does not require changes to the on-chain protocol, it technically does not require a formal GIP approval, but we present it here alongside the full proposal to gather consensus towards this approach and to invite Indexers to participate in this initial stage and provide feedback.

> In this MVP, we will roll out a new gateway component (the “dipper”) that will be controlled with a CLI. Gateway operators can be onboarded to this CLI and use it to add subgraphs to the list of supported subgraphs. Once a subgraph is in the list, the dipper will take care of finding Indexers and setting up indexing agreements with them.

Reviewer: This is a name?
```suggestion
In this MVP, we will roll out a new gateway component (the “Dipper”) that will be controlled with a CLI. Gateway operators can be onboarded to this CLI and use it to add subgraphs to the list of supported subgraphs. Once a subgraph is in the list, the Dipper will take care of finding Indexers and setting up indexing agreements with them.
```

> In this MVP, we will roll out a new gateway component (the “Dipper”) that will be controlled with a CLI. Gateway operators can be onboarded to this CLI and use it to add subgraphs to the list of supported subgraphs. Once a subgraph is in the list, the Dipper will take care of finding Indexers and setting up indexing agreements with them.

Reviewer: Looking at this again, where does the name Dipper come from? Was it coined in terms of "DIPs", which we are moving away from? Is there a better option for people to intuitively understand what it is?

> The Indexer stack will be updated to be able to accept indexing agreements from the dipper when the price is above the price set by the Indexer, and up to a maximum amount of subgraphs also set by the Indexer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Indexer stack will be updated to be able to accept indexing agreements from the Dipper when the price is above the price set by the Indexer, and up to a maximum amount of subgraphs also set by the Indexer.
```

> The Indexer stack will be updated to be able to accept indexing agreements from the dipper when the price is above the price set by the Indexer, and up to a maximum amount of subgraphs also set by the Indexer.

Author: done

Pricing between Indexer and gateway in the MVP will be based on the "amount of work done" proxy detailed above.

> The dipper will initially set up agreements with 3 Indexers for each desired subgraph, as we estimate this is a reasonable number to achieve 99.9% uptime in most subgraphs.

Reviewer: As above, I think Dipper is a named component?
```suggestion
The Dipper will initially set up agreements with 3 Indexers for each desired subgraph, as we estimate this is a reasonable number to achieve 99.9% uptime in most subgraphs.
```

Once the smart contracts proposed in this GIP are deployed, we anticipate adapting the indexer and gateway components accordingly.

The MVP has different trust implications than what this proposal has described so far. In particular these are:

> - Indexers do the work upfront and trust that the gateway will pay them accordingly after the fact, since the gateway issues payment vouchers upon receiving PoIs and not before.

Author: done

> - Gateways trust that indexers are reporting the correct amount of work done, since this information is not posted on-chain and thus it's non-slashable. This is partially mitigated by the fact that the gateway can (theoretically) compare the reported work done among the pool of indexers selected and thus can weed out bad actors, but it's nevertheless a weaker mechanism than slashing.

Author: not sure what we'll be doing here for now. Would rather not set the wrong expectation

## Detailed Specification

> TODO

Reviewer: When? Is this going to be completed for this GIP, or external to it? I do not want to push you to delay publishing, I think this is good work to get out there. A brief setting of expectation (maybe also us deciding) here might be good though ('To be completed during drafting of this GIP.' or 'To be provided by a subsequent GIP.')

Reviewer 3: often when we publish GIPs we publish High-level description first, and add a Detailed spec when it's ready (the original GIP process had these as two distinct "Draft" and "Proposal" stages) - so it's more or less standard in the GIP process for publication to be followed with completing the spec later

Reviewer: I meant to suggest that either way it would be good to let readers know, not me in this comment thread. :) (I know we at times do so.)

## Dependencies

> This GIP depends on Horizon being fully functional.

Reviewer: Might be worth linking to specific GIPs you mean by 'Horizon', and if not the full scope being clear on what scope you need to be fully functional.

## Rationale and Alternatives

> When presenting this proposal, we often hear suggestions for alternative, and possibly simpler, approaches to payments, for instance:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Alternative (possibly simpler) approaches have been considered, including:
```

Author: @pcarranzav

Reviewer 3: I prefer the original, we may reword it a bit but I wanted to explain that these are alternative proposals that we were asked about rather than things we considered ourselves.

- Could the Gateway just pre-pay a fixed amount per subgraph?

> - Could Indexers just charge a specific (Indexer-determined) amount for each subgraph in arrears?

Reviewer: TIL TIL acronym. 😁 (A few days ago now.)

> However, the design of The Graph protocol is, and must be, adversarial. When designing incentives, participants are generally considered rational, but the protocol must be safe against byzantine participants that may derive profit from malicious actions in ways that cannot be predicted within the protocol. The typical cryptoeconomic approach for this is to establish a cost-of-corruption, so that malicious actors are punished and participants can quantify the risk in each interaction.

Reviewer: I would be tempted to say trust-minimized. The protocol is designed to be fault-resistent. While disputes and dispute resolution typically have adversariel mechanisms, that is different from designing the protocol to be adversariel. The protocol is, IMO, designed incentivize co-operative behaviour, while protecting against malicious behaviour. My protocol design is not designed to be adversariel, and the distinction is important.

The protocol being safe against byzantine participants is not a 'but' to considering participants rational. If anything, it is a 'because'. Not needed here though, so I suggest just removing.

Byzanine is a type of fault tolerance (BFT), rather than being a type of participant. It is not a type of fault-tolerance being implemented here, it is about consensus mechanisms rather than dispute resolution.
I've suggested a simplification. It's not perfect, but I think closer to being correct, and likely enough for your point?
```suggestion
However, the design of The Graph protocol is, and must be, trust-minimized. When designing incentives the protocol must protect against malicious actors whom might otherwise profit in ways that cannot be predicted within the protocol. The typical cryptoeconomic approach for this is to establish a cost-of-corruption, so that malicious actors are punished and participants can quantify the risk in each interaction.
```
```suggestion
However, the design of The Graph protocol is, and must be, adversarial. When designing incentives, participants are generally considered rational, but the protocol must be safe against byzantine participants that may derive profit from malicious actions in ways that cannot be predicted within the protocol. The typical cryptoeconomic approach for this is to establish a cost-of-corruption, so that malicious actors are punished and participants can quantify the risk in each interaction.
```

Author: @pcarranzav

Reviewer 3: > While disputes and dispute resolution typically have adversariel mechanisms, that is different from designing the protocol to be adversariel. The protocol is, IMO, designed incentivize co-operative behaviour, while protecting against malicious behaviour. My protocol design is not designed to be adversariel, and the distinction is important.

I'm not sure I understand the difference. The protocol design is adversarial in that it considers that there are adversaries actively trying to attack it and must protect itself from that. That has always been my (intuitive) understanding of adversarial design. ChatGPT described it this way too:

> Designing software in an adversarial way typically refers to creating it with the assumption that its environment, users, or even developers might act maliciously or unpredictably. This design philosophy aims to ensure the system is robust against attacks, errors, or intentional misuse. It is common in areas like security-critical systems, cryptographic protocols, and blockchain applications.

Of course cooperative behavior is super important too, but that doesn't remove the need for adversarial thinking / design.

I'm also not sure I understand the note on Byzantine participants. Byzantine _is_ a type of participant or used that way in the literature, see https://arxiv.org/pdf/1910.08820 - and this paragraph is a nod to that paper actually, that illustrates my thinking behind this section. Considering Byzantine participants explicitly is important because if you're modeling only with rational participants, you might be tempted to remove slashing or not minimize trust: rational actors just want to profit so will behave according to the rules if it gives them more income. Maybe linking to that paper would help?

Reviewer: On adversarial design, it is not such a big deal, but there is a subtle difference (at least in implication) between 'adversarial design' and 'the design being adversarial'. I would be more comfortable with saying I **do** adversarial design than that I **have** an adversarial design, although there is an area of overlap in meaning where you could consider them both to relate to the same activity. I do the first, that is a good thing. I avoid the second, it would be a bad thing. But fuzzy terminology (or worse, thinking) can conflate the two. It sounds like you are only thinking of the first. Do you understand the second, and why that would be bad (or at least represent a different approach, and not one I suggest)?

Regarding the article, I've seen it before. I'm not that impressed TBH. First I'll note it a has a click-bait title that the article does not show to be the case. The sloppy and equivocal misuse of terminology extends beyond the title to the content. The article seems confused about what a rational actor is, and wallows in this confusion and ongoing sloppy terminology use to ramble on about not much of substance. The main point being made is not invalid, but is not new insight, and presented in a verbose waffly way. While the authors state they do not provide formal proof but just an intuitve sketch of an argument, I think it doesn't even do that well. The article might be helpful to some, such flawed thinking in design is common. I think it is poorly constructed waffle, made to appear more profound than it really is by equivocal terminology misuse, and does not contribute helpful new thinking. I do not think it presents a credible source to justify use of terminology, but rather a cationary tale of the mess bad use of terminology gets you into.

Reviewer 3: Thanks for clarifying on adversarial design. I could reword to say "the protocol must be designed in an adversarial way"; would that address your concern?

re: the article, clearly we got very different impressions when reading it 😅 
I can see your point about how it's written, but I personally learned/understood three useful things from that article:
1) The risk / attack vector of someone shorting a token as a general way to derive profit from any malicious activity
2) As a consequence of this (and other potential incentives outside the system), the risk of modeling all protocol participants as rational when it comes to security, and
3) The idea of modeling participants as Byzantine-Altruistic-Rational (this actually comes from this article cited there: https://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/document?repid=rep1&type=pdf&doi=2865c128e0bdda6dabd043ff17a485f29d6d852d - which also talks about "Byzantine users" as a category).

This makes the terminology useful and the conclusions are useful to keep in mind when designing the protocol, even if they may seem obvious in retrospect.

Whether we cite the article or not, I think these are useful things to mention because I've often seen people making arguments that assume participants are rational and would open up risks from "Byzantine behavior".

Reviewer: Regarding adversarial, I would say with an adversarial mindset. But really it is up to you, I share my opinion, but you do not have to word it how I would.

I agree the first paper highlights valid points, but I am not impressed by either its clarity or its logic. I've probobly gone enough into why, but I'll add one of the issues is the misguided and equivocal of what a 'rational actor'. For point 2 you refer to a risk of modeling all protocol participants as rational. This is based on the weird starting assumption that rationality is only about outcomes within the system. While that might well be a mistake that is sometimes made, I do not believe that is the usual starting assumption for a rational actor, quite the contrary. It should certainly not be part of the definition of 'rational actor'! Part of the problem of the paper is that it based on attacking a strawman.

I see the second paper does refer to Byzantine users, although mainly to Byzantine nodes, and the framework makes sense. (This paper is much better written than the other one.) That does (to me) represent valid precendent contrary to my original claim that Byzantine is not a type of participant. I caution however that BAR is about nodes in system subject to BFT analysis, a particular category of consensus mechanisms. We are not desribing such a consensus based system, the term is being used outside the context for which it made sense to categorise participants as BAR. For our context, the restricted assumptions for a rational node of that paper do not apply either. The BAR framework is not about the type of mechanism being discussed. While there is overlap in concepts, I am not sure it is wise to conflate the thinking. I worry that leads to a fuzzy lack of clarity and distinction that creates a risk of misapplying the conclusions of that paper.

Reviewer 3: > This is based on the weird starting assumption that rationality is only about outcomes within the system. While that might well be a mistake that is sometimes made, I do not believe that is the usual starting assumption for a rational actor, quite the contrary.

I agree it should not be, especially when thinking about security. But when modeling the protocol as a game to understand the incentives, it is often a reasonable simplification to think only about the actions and rewards that are present in the system. This will at least let you know if you have a mechanism where the dominant strategy is not what you want participants to do...

> I caution however that BAR is about nodes in system subject to BFT analysis, a particular category of consensus mechanisms.

I agree, but I think the framework is still super useful, and we can (carefully) apply it to the things we do, e.g. we could look at the risks of hiring a Sybil for a subgraph, or the risk of getting incorrect data, based on some assumption of how many Indexers are Byzantine vs. rational.

Anyways, my intent is not to defend that paper. I like to think in terms of "Byzantine participants", and I think it's important to make the point that you need to add protections like slashing even if it looks like a rational actor would be incentivized to act honestly. But it's clear this paragraph needs some rewording.

Reviewer 3: I reworded this section a bit, wdyt @RembrandtK?

In the simple examples mentioned above, there are a few potential attack vectors to consider: the Gateway could refuse payment after the fact, or the Indexer could take the money and run, or the Indexer could try to charge a ridiculous amount after the Gateway has promised payment.

Considering this, the protocol is designed to minimize the need for trust, in two directions:

> - Gateways should not need to trust that Indexers will do their job or provide correct data. Otherwise, Gateways would only query trusted Indexers (e.g. Indexers with a reputation or direct relationship with the Gateway, which could lead to centralization or a winner-take-all Indexer.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Gateways should not need to trust that Indexers will do their job or provide correct data. Otherwise, Gateways would only query trusted Indexers (e.g. Indexers with a reputation or direct relationship with the Gateway, which could lead to centralization or a winner-take-all Indexer).
```

- Indexers should not need to trust that Gateways will provide payments after completing their job. Otherwise, Indexers would only serve trusted Gateways to ensure payment. For example, Indexer would only serve reputable Gateways, which could lead to Gateway centralization and force consumers to access the network through the set of trusted Gateways.

The proposed payment system minimizes trust in both directions.

When combined with the cryptoeconomic security from stake and appropriate fault-detection, the protocol can establish a cost-of-corruption, or a cost to faults in general. With this in place, a new participant entering the Network, for example as a Gateway or even as a Consumer running their own Gateway, can use the Network to its full potential. Any trusted relationship enshrined at the protocol level would directly jeopardize the Network's censorship-resistance and resilience, as it could require participants to interact with only a handful of trusted participants.

> These principles are evident in the original protocol design and in the ongoing efforts to roll out the Timeline Aggregation Protocol (see GIP-0054). The design of the payments mechanism in this GIP is designed to preserve these principles, while allowing maximum flexibility for Gateways to provide alternative payment systems for data consumers or subgraph developers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These principles are evident in the original protocol design and in the ongoing efforts to roll out the Timeline Aggregation Protocol (see [GIP-0054](0054-timeline-aggregation-protocol.md)). The design of the payments mechanism in this GIP is designed to preserve these principles, while allowing maximum flexibility for Gateways to provide alternative payment systems for data consumers or subgraph developers.
```

> When combined with the cryptoeconomic security from stake and appropriate fault-detection, the protocol can establish a cost-of-corruption, or a cost to faults in general. With this in place, a new participant entering the Network, for example as a Gateway or even as a Consumer running their own Gateway, can use the Network to its full potential. Any trusted relationship enshrined at the protocol level would directly jeopardize the Network's censorship-resistance and resilience, as it could require participants to interact with only a handful of trusted participants.

Reviewer: I think either 'the network' or 'The Network', because 'the' is part of the name as I see it, if used as a noun.
```suggestion
When combined with the cryptoeconomic security from stake and appropriate fault-detection, the protocol can establish a cost-of-corruption, or a cost to faults in general. With this in place, a new participant entering the network, for example as a Gateway or even as a Consumer running their own Gateway, can use the network to its full potential. Any trusted relationship enshrined at the protocol level would directly jeopardize the network's censorship-resistance and resilience, as it could require participants to interact with only a handful of trusted participants.
```

It works as follows:

- **Gateways** will add funds to an **Escrow** account specific to the Indexer they want to interact with. This prevents double spending (the Gateway could otherwise pay itself from those same funds before the Indexer collects payment). Funds are locked with a thawing period, so the Indexer can know that funds will be available for at least that amount of time.
- When the Gateway wants an Indexer to perform indexing work, it sends a signed **Voucher**. The Voucher specifies the max cost per period, the agreed price per gas/unit of work, and the details of the work to do (i.e. which subgraph).
- The Indexer can post that Voucher onchain, which results in accepting the **Agreement**, the terms for which are encoded in the Voucher. The Voucher specifies that the Subgraph Service contract is authorized to release the payment; the Subgraph Service contract also specifies the stake-to-fees ratio. From the moment the voucher is posted onchain, the Indexer is guaranteed to be able to collect payment if they post the PoI (indexing up to the current Epoch) within the specified time and meeting all necessary conditions (e.g. provisioned stake).

> - The Gateway doesn’t need to sign anything else to release further payments, they just need to keep the Escrow topped up. The Indexer can stop working if they don’t see sufficient funds in the Escrow. This ensures that Gateways cannot avoid payment after the Indexer has done the work.

Reviewer: Reframing the last sentance, as original form was not true in general, only when relying on Escrow.
```suggestion
- The Gateway doesn’t need to sign anything else to release further payments, they just need to keep the Escrow topped up. The Indexer can stop working if they don’t see sufficient funds in the Escrow. Indexers know that escrowed funds are availble to collect payment for work completed, without relying on trust.
```

Reviewer 2: 153 bracketed comment is different to double spending?

Reviewer 2: >The Indexer can post that Voucher onchain, which results in accepting the **Agreement**,

Could be more explicit about the indexer needing to post the voucher onchain in order to accept the agreement

- The Subgraph Service releases payments conditional on Indexers posting PoIs - this ensures that Indexers cannot collect payment without doing the work (and if they present an invalid PoI, they can be slashed). The voucher release contract can ensure that only up to the maximum amount is released, but the Subgraph Service can release the exact amount based on the agreed pricing (e.g. price per gas times the reported indexing gas used).

**This voucher release mechanism is generic and can be used for other data services:** it validates that the caller is the approved data service contract, that the token amount is within the maximum value specified by the voucher per period, and that the right amount of time has passed. The data service specific aspects e.g. PoI validity, gas/pricing, etc. are defined at the data service contract level. Moreover, this contract can be immutable, so payers are protected even if the data service contract is upgraded.

> It is important to note that we cannot expect Indexers to take on risk, e.g. by agreeing to a fixed price for a specific subgraph (instead of per unit of work/gas). The cost of indexing each subgraph is unknown until the subgraph has been indexed, so if the price was fixed a rational Indexer would simply stop indexing when the subgraph becomes unprofitable, forcing the payer to start over. Tying payments as much as possible to the verifiable cost of performing the work is the best way to prevent Denial of Service scenarios, just like with gas in Ethereum.

Reviewer 3: > We expect Indexers to take on risk, and fundamentally rely on them doing for the network to be operational. :)
This is true; the point was about specific types of risk I guess...

> 'Denial of Service' is a type of attack which this is not, not a description of general loss of service.
True, though it's not unusual to generalize DoS to other loss of service scenarios.

Your suggestion looks good though, I'll accept it
